DOCS/TASKS_ARCHIVE/INDEX.md, before:

# Archived Tasks

## Phase 1: Foundation

- [A1 — Project Initialization](./A1_Project_Initialization.md) ✓ 2025-12-04
- [A2 — Core Types Implementation](./A2_Core_Types_Implementation.md) ✓ 2025-12-05
- [A3 — Domain Types for Specifications](./A3_Domain_Types_for_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-08
  - [Summary Report](./A3-summary.md)

## Phase 2: Lexer & Parser

- [Lexer Implementation](./Lexer_Implementation.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
- [A4 — Parser & AST Construction](./A4_Parser_And_AST_Construction.md) ✓ 2025-12-06

## Phase 3: Specifications (HypercodeGrammar Module)

- [Spec-1 — Lexical Specifications](./Spec-1_Lexical_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
- [Spec-2 — Indentation & Depth Specifications](./Spec-2_Indentation_And_Depth_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
- [Spec-3 — Path Validation Specifications](./Spec-3_Path_Validation_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
- [Spec-4 — Composite & Decision Specifications](./Spec-4_Composite_And_Decision_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11

## Phase 4: Reference Resolution

- [B1 — Reference Resolver](./B1_Reference_Resolver.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
  - [Summary Report](./B1-summary.md)
- [B2 — Dependency Tracker](./B2_Dependency_Tracker.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
  - [Summary Report](./B2-summary.md) ✓ 2025-12-08
- [B3 — File Loader & Caching](./B3_File_Loader_Caching.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
- [B4 — Recursive Compilation](./B4_Recursive_Compilation.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
  - [Summary Report](./B4-summary.md)

## Phase 5: Markdown Emission

- [C1 — Heading Adjuster](./C1_Heading_Adjuster.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
- [C2 — Markdown Emitter](./C2_Markdown_Emitter.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
  - [Summary Report](./C2-summary.md)
- [C3 — Manifest Generator](./C3_Manifest_Generator.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
  - [Summary Report](./C3-summary.md)

## Phase 6: CLI & Integration

- [D1 — Argument Parsing](./D1_Argument_Parsing.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
  - [Summary Report](./D1-summary.md)
- [D2 — Compiler Driver](./D2_Compiler_Driver.md) ✓ 2025-12-10
  - [Summary Report](./D2-summary.md)
  - [Technical Debt](./D2-tech-debt.md)
- [D3 — Diagnostic Printer](./D3_Diagnostic_Printer.md) ✓ 2025-12-12
  - [Summary Report](./D3-summary.md)
- [PR 65 — Fix Caret Alignment (DiagnosticPrinter)](./PR65_Fix_Caret_Alignment.md) ✓ 2025-12-12

## Phase 8: Testing & Quality Assurance

- [E1 — Test Corpus Implementation](./E1_Test_Corpus_Implementation.md) ✓ 2025-12-10
  - [Summary Report](./E1-summary.md)
  - [Test Results](./E1-test-results-final.md)
- [E2 — Cross-Platform Testing](./E2_Cross_Platform_Testing.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
  - [Summary Report](./E2-summary.md)
  - [Test Results](./E2-test-results.md)

## Phase 9: Optimization & Finalization

- [OPT-DET — Verify deterministic output](./OPT-DET_Verify_deterministic_output.md) ✓ 2025-12-12
  - [Summary Report](./OPT-DET-summary.md)

Commit message:

Archive completed task: Integration-1 — Lexer with Specifications
- Moved Integration-1_Lexer_with_Specifications.md to TASKS_ARCHIVE/
- Marked task as complete in Workplan.md (2025-12-12)
- Updated INDEX.md with Phase 7 integration task
- Cleared next.md (no active task selected)
- Added archive metadata with completion date

DOCS/TASKS_ARCHIVE/INDEX.md, after:

# Archived Tasks

## Phase 1: Foundation

- [A1 — Project Initialization](./A1_Project_Initialization.md) ✓ 2025-12-04
- [A2 — Core Types Implementation](./A2_Core_Types_Implementation.md) ✓ 2025-12-05
- [A3 — Domain Types for Specifications](./A3_Domain_Types_for_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-08
  - [Summary Report](./A3-summary.md)

## Phase 2: Lexer & Parser

- [Lexer Implementation](./Lexer_Implementation.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
- [A4 — Parser & AST Construction](./A4_Parser_And_AST_Construction.md) ✓ 2025-12-06

## Phase 3: Specifications (HypercodeGrammar Module)

- [Spec-1 — Lexical Specifications](./Spec-1_Lexical_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
- [Spec-2 — Indentation & Depth Specifications](./Spec-2_Indentation_And_Depth_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
- [Spec-3 — Path Validation Specifications](./Spec-3_Path_Validation_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
- [Spec-4 — Composite & Decision Specifications](./Spec-4_Composite_And_Decision_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-11

## Phase 4: Reference Resolution

- [B1 — Reference Resolver](./B1_Reference_Resolver.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
  - [Summary Report](./B1-summary.md)
- [B2 — Dependency Tracker](./B2_Dependency_Tracker.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
  - [Summary Report](./B2-summary.md) ✓ 2025-12-08
- [B3 — File Loader & Caching](./B3_File_Loader_Caching.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
- [B4 — Recursive Compilation](./B4_Recursive_Compilation.md) ✓ 2025-12-06
  - [Summary Report](./B4-summary.md)

## Phase 5: Markdown Emission

- [C1 — Heading Adjuster](./C1_Heading_Adjuster.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
- [C2 — Markdown Emitter](./C2_Markdown_Emitter.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
  - [Summary Report](./C2-summary.md)
- [C3 — Manifest Generator](./C3_Manifest_Generator.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
  - [Summary Report](./C3-summary.md)

## Phase 6: CLI & Integration

- [D1 — Argument Parsing](./D1_Argument_Parsing.md) ✓ 2025-12-09
  - [Summary Report](./D1-summary.md)
- [D2 — Compiler Driver](./D2_Compiler_Driver.md) ✓ 2025-12-10
  - [Summary Report](./D2-summary.md)
  - [Technical Debt](./D2-tech-debt.md)
- [D3 — Diagnostic Printer](./D3_Diagnostic_Printer.md) ✓ 2025-12-12
  - [Summary Report](./D3-summary.md)
- [PR 65 — Fix Caret Alignment (DiagnosticPrinter)](./PR65_Fix_Caret_Alignment.md) ✓ 2025-12-12

## Phase 7: Lexer & Resolver Integration with Specs

- [Integration-1 — Lexer with Specifications](./Integration-1_Lexer_with_Specifications.md) ✓ 2025-12-12
  - [Summary Report](./Integration-1-summary.md)

## Phase 8: Testing & Quality Assurance

- [E1 — Test Corpus Implementation](./E1_Test_Corpus_Implementation.md) ✓ 2025-12-10
  - [Summary Report](./E1-summary.md)
  - [Test Results](./E1-test-results-final.md)
- [E2 — Cross-Platform Testing](./E2_Cross_Platform_Testing.md) ✓ 2025-12-11
  - [Summary Report](./E2-summary.md)
  - [Test Results](./E2-test-results.md)

## Phase 9: Optimization & Finalization

- [OPT-DET — Verify deterministic output](./OPT-DET_Verify_deterministic_output.md) ✓ 2025-12-12
  - [Summary Report](./OPT-DET-summary.md)
